.TH RPG-ANALYZE 1 "July 2026" "rpg-analyze 0.1.0" "RPG II Static Analyzer"
.SH NAME
rpg-analyze \- static analysis toolkit for RPG II source
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rpg-analyze
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] [\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fICOMMAND OPTIONS\fR] \fI<file...>\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rpg-analyze
performs static analysis on RPG II source files. It provides a synthesized
report mode that runs multiple analysis modules, plus utility commands for
decoding, searching, diffing, formatting, and documenting RPG programs.
.PP
With no command given, the default \fBreport\fR command runs, which executes
all enabled analysis modules and emits a synthesized report.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B report
Run analysis modules and emit a synthesized report (default).
.TP
.B decode
Decode raw spec lines into labeled columns.
.TP
.B search
Structured column-aware query across files.
.TP
.B diff
Semantic structural diff between two programs.
.TP
.B format
Lint / canonicalize formatting (check-only).
.TP
.B docgen
Generate a Markdown reference page for one program.
.TP
.B callgraph
Inter-program CALL/shared-file dependency graph.
.TP
.B duplicate
Clone / copy-paste detector across many files.
.TP
.B portfolio
Codebase-wide metrics dashboard across many files.
.TP
.B migrate
Migration-difficulty scoring across many files.
.PP
Any analysis module id (see MODULES below) is also a valid command, equivalent
to \fBreport -m <module>\fR.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit machine-readable JSON instead of text.
.TP
.B \-\-no-color
Disable ANSI color output.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress section bodies; print only findings.
.TP
.BR \-\-severity " " \fILEVEL\fR
Minimum severity to show: \fBerror\fR, \fBwarn\fR, \fBinfo\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-compiler-feats " " \fIFILE\fR
Features file for the \fBcompat\fR module.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.SH REPORT OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-module " " \fINAME\fR
Enable one module (repeatable to select multiple).
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
Enable every analysis module (the default).
.TP
.BR \-\-no-module " " \fINAME\fR
Disable one module (use with \-\-all to exclude).
.TP
.B \-\-no-findings
Suppress the synthesized findings section.
.TP
.BR \-\-section-order " " \fIa,b,c\fR
Custom ordering of report sections.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIFILE\fR
Write report to a file instead of stdout.
.SH UTILITY COMMAND OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-line " " \fIN\fR
(decode) Show only line N.
.TP
.BR \-\-range " " \fIA-B\fR
(decode) Show only lines A-B.
.TP
.BR \-\-query " " \fIEXPR\fR
(search) Query DSL, e.g.\ \fIop:COMP ind:20\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-dot
(callgraph) Emit Graphviz dot instead of a text tree.
.TP
.BR \-\-threshold " " \fIF\fR
(duplicate) Minimum similarity to report (default 0.9).
.TP
.B \-\-html
(portfolio) Emit an HTML dashboard instead of text.
.SH MODULES
.TP
.B summary
Program overview and profile.
.TP
.B files
File description map.
.TP
.B recordmap
Record layout reconstruction.
.TP
.B fields
Field definition catalog.
.TP
.B xref
Field cross-reference (where each field is read/written).
.TP
.B indicators
Indicator lifecycle trace (set, tested, turned off).
.TP
.B subroutines
Intra-program subroutine map.
.TP
.B controlflow
Control-flow graph and reachability analysis.
.TP
.B cycle
Program-cycle and control-level decoder.
.TP
.B complexity
Complexity metrics (cyclomatic, nesting depth).
.TP
.B deadcode
Unused-definition and dead-path finder.
.TP
.B security
Risky-pattern scanner.
.TP
.B compat
Compiler-coverage checker (which constructs the compiler supports).
.TP
.B condlogic
Conditioning-indicator reconstruction.
.TP
.B buffer
Buffer integrity check (field overlaps, gaps).
.TP
.B termination
LR / exit analysis (does the program terminate correctly).
.TP
.B dataflow
Output-field data-flow traces.
.TP
.B deps
External dependency inventory.
.TP
.B comments
Comment and TODO mining.
.TP
.B smells
Anomaly and code-smell detection.
.SH EXAMPLES
Run the full synthesized report on one file:
.PP
.RS
.B rpg-analyze tests/report.rpg
.RE
.PP
Run a single module:
.PP
.RS
.B rpg-analyze indicators tests/report.rpg
.RE
.PP
Decode spec lines into labeled columns:
.PP
.RS
.B rpg-analyze decode tests/chain.rpg
.RE
.PP
Search for all COMP operations using indicator 20:
.PP
.RS
.B rpg-analyze search --query "op:COMP ind:20" *.rpg
.RE
.PP
JSON output for CI integration:
.PP
.RS
.B rpg-analyze --json --severity warn tests/*.rpg
.RE
.PP
Generate a call graph in dot format:
.PP
.RS
.B rpg-analyze callgraph --dot *.rpg | dot -Tsvg > callgraph.svg
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rpgc (1)
.PP
TOOLS_IDEAS.md \(em full design and rationale for every module
