.TH RPG-CLEAN 1 "July 2026" "rpg-clean 0.1.0" "RPG II Source Cleanup"
.SH NAME
rpg-clean \- repair mangled RPG source files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rpg-clean
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fI<file...>\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rpg-clean
repairs RPG source files that have been damaged by the transfer/export step
that pulled them off a midrange system (S/34, S/36, AS/400, IBM i). It detects
each issue independently and only applies a fix when its detector fires, so
already-clean files are left byte-identical and the tool is safe to run over
whole directories of mixed inputs.
.PP
It handles the same staged cleanup that
.B rpgc
and
.B rpg-analyze
run automatically when loading source (via the shared
.I rpgc_parse
frontend), so the tool and the compiler agree on exactly what "clean" means.
Use
.B rpg-clean
when you want to repair files on disk rather than have the compiler repair
them silently in memory.
.SH CLEANUP STAGES
The pipeline runs stages in a fixed order; each only fires if its detector
confirms the issue is present:
.TP
1.\ \ trailing NUL padding
IBM i member dumps are often zero-padded to a record boundary. A trailing run
of four or more NUL bytes is stripped.
.TP
2.\ \ EBCDIC \(-> ASCII decode
If the input is mostly non-ASCII, each candidate codepage (cp037 US EBCDIC,
cp500 international) is decoded and scored for "ASCII RPG source"-likeness
(printable ASCII ratio). The best wins, but only if it both scores high (>=90%
printable) and beats the raw bytes by a clear margin (>=10 percentage points).
Files that are ambiguous are left alone rather than guessed.
.TP
3.\ \ separator-sequence repair
Some exports replace line terminators with stray control sequences: the EBCDIC
0x15 "New Line" character mis-transcoded to the UTF-8 C1 control
.IR U+0082 " (bytes C2 82), or"
5250 workstation transparent-write controls (ESC + 0xEB + ...) that got
embedded in the source. Known separator byte-patterns (see the
.I KnownSeparators
table in
.IR compiler/src/clean.cpp )
are replaced with newlines. Adding a new separator dialect is a one-line table
entry.
.TP
4.\ \ fixed-width no-newline split
S/34 and S/36 card-image dumps are fixed-length records with no line
terminators at all -- a 240-byte file is three records run together. This is
handled in two ways:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
If the whole file has no newlines, it is split into fixed-width records
(default 80, override with
.BR \-w ).
.IP \(bu 2
If the file is a hybrid -- some lines already newline-terminated, others are
"blobs" of records concatenated with no separators (as in many IBM i member
exports) -- each over-long line is split individually. The width is
auto-detected per line by trying candidate widths (80 RPG II, 96, 100) and
picking the one that puts a valid spec letter at column 6 of the most records.
Lines that cannot be confidently aligned (e.g. comment prose with no spec
letters) are left intact and flagged suspicious.
.RE
.TP
5.\ \ line-ending normalization
CRLF and lone CR are normalized to LF, and the file is guaranteed to end with
a newline.
.TP
6.\ \ residue check
After all stages, if more than 1% of bytes remain non-printable/non-ASCII, or
any single line exceeds ~120 columns (far beyond any real RPG fixed-format
width), the file is flagged
.IR suspicious :
the cleanup could not confidently classify it and a human should look.
.SH MODES
.PP
.B rpg-clean
never modifies its input files. By default it is a Unix filter: cleaned output
goes to stdout (inputs are concatenated), so it composes with pipes and
redirection. The only way to get a file written is to name one explicitly with
.BR \-o .
To replace a file in place, redirect yourself:
.PP
.RS
.EX
rpg-clean prog.rpg > prog.rpg.new && mv prog.rpg.new prog.rpg
.EE
.RE
.TP
(default)
Write cleaned output to stdout.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIFILE\fR
Write one cleaned input to
.IR FILE .
Takes exactly one input file.
.TP
.B \-\-check
Read-only: report what
.I would
change; write no output. Exit status 1 if any input needs cleaning, 2 if any
input looks suspicious even after cleaning.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-width " " \fIN\fR
Fixed-record width for the no-newline splitting stage (default 80).
.TP
.B \-\-report
Print a per-stage note to stderr for each input, describing what fired.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
All inputs processed, or
.B \-\-check
found nothing to clean.
.TP
1
.B \-\-check
found one or more inputs needing cleaning.
.TP
2
I/O error, bad CLI usage, or an input looked
.I suspicious
after cleaning.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Clean one file to stdout
.B rpg-clean prog.rpg > prog.clean.rpg
.TP
Clean a whole library, writing each result next to its source
.B for f in legacy/*.rpg; do rpg-clean "$f" > "$f.clean"; done
.TP
Replace a file in place (atomic)
.B rpg-clean prog.rpg > prog.rpg.new && mv prog.rpg.new prog.rpg
.TP
Write one cleaned file to a named output
.B rpg-clean -o prog.clean.rpg prog.rpg
.TP
Just check whether a file needs cleaning
.B rpg-clean \-\-check prog.rpg
.PP
Exit 0 means already clean; exit 1 means it needs cleaning; exit 2 means it
looks suspicious even after cleaning.
.TP
See what each stage did
.B rpg-clean \-\-report drvuni.mbr > drvuni.rpg
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rpgc (1),
.BR rpg-analyze (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Tom White <tom.white@gmail.com>
