.TH RPGC 1 "July 2026" "rpgc 0.1.0" "RPG II Compiler"
.SH NAME
rpgc \- RPG II to LLVM compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rpgc
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fI<input.rpg\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rpgc
compiles RPG II source files (the column-oriented fixed-format language used on
IBM System/34, System/36, and AS/400 midrange systems) into native Linux ELF
executables via LLVM 19.
.PP
The compiler parses the four core specification types (F-spec files, I-spec
input, C-spec calculations, O-spec output), emits LLVM IR, and drives
.BR llc (1)
and
.BR clang (1)
to produce a final executable linked against a small C runtime library
(\fIlibrpgruntime.a\fR).
.PP
Generated programs follow the implicit RPG program cycle: an outer loop that
reads input records, extracts fields, runs total and detail calculations, and
produces output. The cycle terminates when the last-record (LR) indicator turns
on at end-of-file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o " " \fIfile\fR
Output file path. Defaults to the input name with the appropriate extension
(\fB.x\fR for executables, \fB.o\fR for objects, \fB.s\fR for assembly,
\fB.ll\fR for IR).
.TP
.BR \-\-emit-ir
Emit textual LLVM IR (\fB.ll\fR) instead of an executable. Useful for
inspecting the generated code.
.TP
.BR \-\-emit-asm
Emit target assembly (\fB.s\fR) via
.BR llc .
.TP
.BR \-\-emit-obj
Emit a relocatable object file (\fB.o\fR) via
.BR llc .
.TP
.BR \-\-emit-exe
Emit a final linked executable (default).
.TP
.BR \-\-llc " " \fIpath\fR
Path to the
.BR llc (1)
binary. Defaults to the path found at configure time (e.g.\ \fI/usr/bin/llc-19\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-clang " " \fIpath\fR
Path to the
.BR clang (1)
binary. Defaults to the path found at configure time (e.g.\ \fI/usr/bin/clang-19\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-runtime " " \fIpath\fR
Path to \fIlibrpgruntime.a\fR. Defaults to a search starting next to the
.B rpgc
executable (\fI<prefix>/lib/rpgc/librpgruntime.a\fR), falling back to the
build-tree path baked in at compile time.
.TP
.BR \-O\fIlevel\fR
LLVM optimization level (0\(en3). Default is 0 (no optimization). At \fB-O2\fR
and above, the LLVM new-pass-manager pipeline runs before emission.
.TP
.B \-\-save-temps
Keep intermediate \fB.ll\fR and \fB.o\fR files in a temporary directory.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose mode. Print each tool invocation (\fBllc\fR, \fBclang\fR) as it runs.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the compiler version and linked LLVM version, then exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compile a program to a native executable:
.PP
.RS
.B rpgc tests/math.rpg
.br
./math; echo $?
.br
# 42
.RE
.PP
Emit LLVM IR for inspection:
.PP
.RS
.B rpgc --emit-ir tests/goto.rpg
.RE
.PP
Compile with optimization:
.PP
.RS
.B rpgc -O2 tests/report.rpg -o report
.RE
.PP
.SH TEST HOOK
For testing without file I/O, if a program defines a field named
\fBRPGRET\fR, the generated executable returns its low byte as the process exit
code. Otherwise the exit code is the LR indicator (0 or 1). This is a test
affordance only; real programs communicate via LR and O-spec output.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I librpgruntime.a
C runtime library linked into every compiled RPG program. Handles file I/O,
numeric decoding, and output formatting.
.TP
.I <prefix>/lib/rpgc/librpgruntime.a
Default install location for the runtime library.
.TP
.I <prefix>/include/rpgc/rpg_runtime.h
Runtime header, useful for understanding the generated code's external calls.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rpg-analyze (1),
.BR llc (1),
.BR clang (1)
.PP
docs/ARCHITECTURE.md \(em internal design and IR mapping
.br
docs/SPEC_MAP.md \(em authoritative column-position reference
.br
docs/tutorial/ \(em interactive RPG II tutorial
